# What is it?
This document contains chapter "I.12.6 Memory Model and Optimizations" from ["ECMA-335, 6th edition, June 2012" PDF document](https://ecma-international.org/wp-content/uploads/ECMA-335_6th_edition_june_2012.pdf).

---

### I.12.6 Memory Model and Optimizations

#### I.12.6.1 The Memory Store

By “memory store,” we mean the regular process memory that the CLI operates within. Conceptually, this store is simply an array of bytes. The index into this array is the address of a data object. The CLI accesses data objects in the memory store via the `ldind.*` and `stind.*` instructions.

#### I.12.6.2 Alignment

Built-in data types shall be properly aligned, which is defined as follows:

- 1-byte, 2-byte, and 4-byte data is properly aligned when it is stored at a 1-byte, 2-byte, or 4-byte boundary, respectively.
- 8-byte data is properly aligned when it is stored on the same boundary required by the underlying hardware for atomic access to a native int.

Thus, `int16` and `unsigned int16` start on even addresses; `int32`, `unsigned int32`, and `float32` start on addresses divisible by 4; and `int64`, `unsigned int64`, and `float64` start on addresses divisible by 4 or 8, depending upon the target architecture. The native size types (`native int`, `native unsigned int`, and `&`) are always naturally aligned (4 bytes or 8 bytes, depending on the architecture). When generated externally, these should also be aligned to their natural size, although portable code can use 8-byte alignment to guarantee architecture independence. It is strongly recommended that `float64` be aligned on an 8-byte boundary, even when the size of native int is 32 bits.

There is a special prefix instruction, `unaligned.`, that can immediately precede a `ldind`, `stind`, `initblk`, or `cpblk` instruction. This prefix indicates that the data can have arbitrary alignment; the JIT compiler is required to generate code that correctly performs the effect of the instructions regardless of the actual alignment. Otherwise, if the data is not properly aligned, and no `unaligned.` prefix has been specified, executing the instruction can generate unaligned memory faults or incorrect data.

#### I.12.6.3 Byte Ordering

For data types larger than 1 byte, the byte ordering is dependent on the target CPU. Code that depends on byte ordering might not run on all platforms. The PE file format (see §I.12.2) allows the file to be marked to indicate that it depends on a particular type ordering.

#### I.12.6.4 Optimization

Conforming implementations of the CLI are free to execute programs using any technology that guarantees, within a single thread of execution, that side-effects and exceptions generated by a thread are visible in the order specified by the CIL. For this purpose only, volatile operations (including volatile reads) constitute visible side-effects. (Note that while only volatile operations constitute visible side-effects, volatile operations also affect the visibility of non-volatile references.) Volatile operations are specified in §I.12.6.7. There are no ordering guarantees relative to exceptions injected into a thread by another thread (such exceptions are sometimes called “asynchronous exceptions,” e.g., `System.Threading.ThreadAbortException`).

[Rationale: An optimizing compiler is free to reorder side-effects and synchronous exceptions to the extent that this reordering does not change any observable program behavior. End rationale]

[Note: An implementation of the CLI is permitted to use an optimizing compiler, for example, to convert CIL to native machine code provided the compiler maintains (within each single thread of execution) the same order of side-effects and synchronous exceptions. This is a stronger condition than ISO C++ (which permits reordering between a pair of sequence points) or ISO Scheme (which permits reordering of arguments to functions). End note]

Optimizers are granted additional latitude for relaxed exceptions in methods. A method is E-relaxed for a kind of exception if the innermost custom attribute `System.Runtime.CompilerServices.CompilationRelaxationsAttribute` pertaining to exceptions of kind E is present and specifies to relax exceptions of kind E. (Here, “innermost” means inspecting the method, its class, and its assembly, in that order.)

An E-relaxed sequence is a sequence of instructions executed by a thread, where:
- Each instruction causing visible side effects or exceptions is in an E-relaxed method.
- The sequence does not cross the boundary of a non-trivial protected or handler region.

A region is trivial if it can be optimized away under the rules for non-relaxed methods.

Below, an E-check is defined as a test performed by a CIL instruction that upon failure causes an exception of kind E to be thrown. Furthermore, the type and range tests performed by the methods that set or get an array element’s value, or that get an array element’s address are considered checks here.

A conforming implementation of the CLI is free to change the timing of relaxed E-checks in an E-relaxed sequence, with respect to other checks and instructions as long as the observable behavior of the program is changed only in the case that a relaxed E-check fails. If an E-check fails in an E-relaxed sequence:
- The rest of the associated instruction must be suppressed, in order to preserve verifiability. If the instruction was expected to push a value on the VES stack, no subsequent instruction that uses that value should visibly execute.
- It is unspecified whether or not any or all of the side effects in the E-relaxed sequence are made visible by the VES.
- The check’s exception is thrown some time in the sequence unless the sequence throws another exception. When multiple relaxed checks fail, it is unspecified as to which exception is thrown by the VES.

[Note: Relaxed checks preserve verifiability, but not necessarily security. Because a relaxed check’s exception might be deferred and subsequent code allowed to execute, programmers should never rely on implicit checks to preserve security, but instead use explicit checks and throws when security is an issue. End note]

[Rationale: Different programmers have different goals. For some, trading away precise exception behavior is unacceptable. For others, optimization is more important. The programmer must specify their preference. Different kinds of exceptions may be relaxed or not relaxed separately because different programmers have different notions of which kinds of exceptions must be timed precisely. End rationale]

[Note: For background and implementation information for relaxed exception handling, plus examples, see Annex F of Partition VI. End note]

#### I.12.6.5 Locks and Threads

The logical abstraction of a thread of control is captured by an instance of the `System.Threading.Thread` object in the class library. Classes beginning with the prefix “System.Threading” (see Partition IV) provide much of the user-visible support for this abstraction.

To create consistency across threads of execution, the CLI provides the following mechanisms:
1. Synchronized methods. A lock that is visible across threads controls entry to the body of a synchronized method. For instance and virtual methods, the lock is associated with the `this` pointer. For static methods, the lock is associated with the type to which the method belongs. The lock is taken by the logical thread (see `System.Threading.Thread` in Partition IV) and can be entered any number of times by the same thread; entry by other threads is prohibited while the first thread is still holding the lock. The CLI shall release the lock when control exits (by any means) the method invocation that first acquired the lock.
2. Explicit locks and monitors. These are provided in the class library, see `System.Threading.Monitor`. Many of the methods in the `System.Threading.Monitor` class accept an Object as an argument, allowing direct access to the same lock that is used by synchronized methods. While the CLI is responsible for ensuring correct protocol when this lock is only used by synchronized methods, the user must accept this responsibility when using explicit monitors on these same objects.
3. Volatile reads and writes. The CIL includes a prefix, `volatile.`, that specifies that the subsequent operation is to be performed with the cross-thread visibility constraints described in §I.12.6.7. In addition, the class library provides methods to perform explicit volatile reads (`System.Thread.VolatileRead`) and writes (`System.Thread.VolatileWrite`), as well as barrier synchronization (`System.Thread.MemoryBarrier`).
4. Built-in atomic reads and writes. All reads and writes of certain properly aligned data types are guaranteed to occur atomically. See §I.12.6.6.
5. Explicit atomic operations. The class library provides a variety of atomic operations in the `System.Threading.Interlocked` class. These operations (e.g., Increment, Decrement, Exchange, and CompareExchange) perform implicit acquire/release operations.

Acquiring a lock (`System.Threading.Monitor.Enter` or entering a synchronized method) shall implicitly perform a volatile read operation, and releasing a lock (`System.Threading.Monitor.Exit` or leaving a synchronized method) shall implicitly perform a volatile write operation. See §I.12.6.7.

#### I.12.6.6 Atomic Reads and Writes

A conforming CLI shall guarantee that read and write access to properly aligned memory locations no larger than the native word size (the size of type `native int`) is atomic (see §I.12.6.2) when all the write accesses to a location are the same size. Atomic writes shall alter no bits other than those written. Unless explicit layout control (see Partition II (Controlling Instance Layout)) is used to alter the default behavior, data elements no larger than the natural word size (the size of a native int) shall be properly aligned. Object references shall be treated as though they are stored in the native word size.

[Note: There is no guarantee about atomic update (read-modify-write) of memory, except for methods provided for that purpose as part of the class library (see Partition IV). An atomic write of a “small data item” (an item no larger than the native word size) is required to do an atomic read/modify/write on hardware that does not support direct writes to small data items. End note]

[Note: There is no guaranteed atomic access to 8-byte data when the size of a native int is 32 bits even though some implementations might perform atomic operations when the data is aligned on an 8-byte boundary. End note]

#### I.12.6.7 Volatile Reads and Writes

The `volatile.` prefix on certain instructions shall guarantee cross-thread memory ordering rules. They do not provide atomicity, other than that guaranteed by the specification of §I.12.6.6.

A volatile read has “acquire semantics” meaning that the read is guaranteed to occur prior to any references to memory that occur after the read instruction in the CIL instruction sequence. A volatile write has “release semantics” meaning that the write is guaranteed to happen after any memory references prior to the write instruction in the CIL instruction sequence.

A conforming implementation of the CLI shall guarantee this semantics of volatile operations. This ensures that all threads will observe volatile writes performed by any other thread in the order they were performed. But a conforming implementation is not required to provide a single total ordering of volatile writes as seen from all threads of execution.

An optimizing compiler that converts CIL to native code shall not remove any volatile operation, nor shall it coalesce multiple volatile operations into a single operation.

[Rationale: One traditional use of volatile operations is to model hardware registers that are visible through direct memory access. In these cases, removing or coalescing the operations might change the behavior of the program. End rationale]

[Note: An optimizing compiler from CIL to native code is permitted to reorder code, provided that it guarantees both the single-thread semantics described in §I.12.6 and the cross-thread semantics of volatile operations. End note]

#### I.12.6.8 Other Memory Model Issues

All memory allocated for static variables (other than those assigned RVAs within a PE file, see Partition II) and objects shall be zeroed before they are made visible to any user code.

A conforming implementation of the CLI shall ensure that, even in a multi-threaded environment and without proper user synchronization, objects are allocated in a manner that prevents unauthorized memory access and prevents invalid operations from occurring. In particular, on multiprocessor memory systems where explicit synchronization is required to ensure that all relevant data structures are visible (for example, vtable pointers) the Execution Engine shall be responsible for either enforcing this synchronization automatically or for converting errors due to lack of synchronization into non-fatal, non-corrupting, user-visible exceptions.

It is explicitly not a requirement that a conforming implementation of the CLI guarantee that all state updates performed within a constructor be uniformly visible before the constructor completes. CIL generators can ensure this requirement themselves by inserting appropriate calls to the memory barrier or volatile write instructions.
